readme.md, before:

# Pits and Orbs Environment as a Multi-Agent System
## Description
A simple game written from scratch in Python having two modes: Terminal Printing and PyGame Window Rendering. To switch between these modes simply change this argument as follows: ```pygame_mode=True``` to have a nice PyGame window enabling you to play the game manually; this argument can be changed from ```game.pits_and_orbs.PitsAndOrbs``` constructor ```pygame_mode``` argument. Or, ```render_mode="human"``` argument from ```environment.pits_and_orbs_env.PitsAndOrbsEnv``` and ```utils.make_env``` function.

The ```game``` directory contains files and codes only for game object and is not suitable for RL projects. On the contrary, ```environment``` directory contains gym environment version of the game which has certain properties to used for Reinforcement Learning algorithms. You can install the game with the installer located in the ```dist``` directory.

The goal of the game is for the player to move the orbs to the pits in order to fill them all; that's just it. The game's properties can be set to values other than their default to have a distinct game. For example, the size of the game (its grid shape), the number of orbs (```orbs_num```), the number of pits (```pits_num```), and, even, the number of players (```player_num```) can be changed by the game's constructors. The ```player_num>1``` means the game will be a multi-agent system that the agents will try to cooperate whit eachother to fill the pits. The only thing that makes the environment a bit hard to solve is the limited number of movements that each player can take; the default value of ```max_movements``` is 30. In this environment movements is counted only through actual position changes for a player, but not the direction changes, picking orb up, or putting orb down since these are called steps in RL.

The challenging part of training an agent is that this environment is partially observable which means that the agent only has access to its eight neighbors, but not the whole state board (a 2D array). A memory is implemented to appease this matter. The memory tries to update each new cells that the agent sees (it sees them because they're its neighbors). That being said, the argument ```return_obs_type``` (for the game's constructor, environment's constructor, or utils.make_env function) can take three inputs to change the output (the observation): ```"partial obs"```, ```"full state"```, or ```"neighbors"```. The first one makes the game or environment return the memory of the agent(s) from ```reset``` or ```step``` functions. The second one makes them to return the entire table (array) of the game. The third one makes them to return only the 8 neighbors of the player.

The environment only allows players (or agents) to take 4 types of actions: ```Turn Right - Move Forward - Pick Orb Up - Put Orb Down```. It is obvious that ```Move Forward``` action means the player moves to the next cell in the direction that it is in without crossing the boundaries. 
Different values for the actions are:
| Action | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| Turn Right | 0 |
| Move Forward | 1 |
| Pick Orb Up | 2 |
| Put Orb Down | 3 |

Different values for player direction are:
| Direction | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| West | 0 |
| North | 1 |
| East | 2 |
| South | 3 |

Finally, different values for cell type are (valid values that are stored in a numpy array of a certain size that indicate existence of different situations in that position):
| Cell Type | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| Nothing | 0 |
| Player | 1 |
| Orb | 2 |
| Pit | 3 |
| Player & Orb | 4 |
| Player & Pit | 5 |
| Orb & Pit | 6 |
| Player & Orb & Pit | 7 |

The environment outputs an observation object as an OrderedDict from ```step``` function and ```reset``` function; its structure is as follows:

```python
{
    "board": observation, # observation is an np array (depends on the return_obs_type argument)
    "player0_direction": player_directions[i], # i is the current player's index
    "player0_has_orb": players_have_orb[i] # i is the current player's index
}
```

0 after last two keys mean that those are first player's information, and if there were other player, we would have more keys.

To build the game simply use the following:

```bash
python3 game/setup.py build
```

or create an installer while building the game:
```bash
python3 game/setup.py bdist_msi
```

If the ```pygame_with_help``` argument is set to ```True```, the PyGame window will have extra height to show players' movements and a guide to what every possible coloring and shapes mean. For illustration purposes, ```pygame_with_help=True``` is set and shown below:

![](https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs/blob/main/materials/screenshot.jpg?raw=true "A sample screenshot of the starting point of the PyGame Window mode with help showed.")

## Reward Function
Two distinct reward functions are implemented, one of which is sparse and the other isn't. By the arguments ```reward_function_type``` and ```reward_function```, the using reward function of the game can be changed. ```reward_function``` can get any function that has an argument of flag switching on all the situations a player can get into. The situations and their values for the two implemented reward functions are as follows:

| Situation Flag | Reward Function Type 0 Values | Reward Function Type 1 Values |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| turned right | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to move forward and moved forward | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward but stayed | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to move forward to cell type 1 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward to cell type 2 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to pick orb up with already having another orb | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to pick orb up in cell type 4 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to pick orb up in cell types other than 4 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down without having an orb | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 1 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 4 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 5 | 1. | 1. |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 7 | 0. | -0.1 |

## Loading the Project
To load the project use the following logic:

```bash
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs.git
cd "Pits-and-Orbs"
```

If you are going to use the project in a headless server like Google Colab, try installing a virtual display as the following (this is only the case if you are trying to run an agent in the environment and create a .gif file from the frames of the PyGame window since PyGame needs a display to render its frames):

```bash
apt-get install swig cmake ffmpeg
apt install python-opengl
apt install ffmpeg
apt install xvfb
pip3 install pyvirtualdisplay
```

Then, use the following piece of code in Python (like Colab) to create a virtual display before any of the project's codes:

```python
from pyvirtualdisplay import Display


virtual_display = Display(visible=0, size=(1400, 900))
virtual_display.start()
```

## Installation
To use the game and its environment you can install the below necessary dependencies in a new virtual environment (all the materials are tested in Python=3.10.10), but these do not include the usages for RL agents. First create and activate a new environment or just skip this part (if you are using a headless server like Colab make sure to go through with the last section's guide in your dev environment).

```bash
python3 venv -env pae_env
source pae_env/bin/activate
```
Then, install project's dependencies for rendering it on a PyGame window.

```bash
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

To use RL models you should either install TensorFlow or Stable Baselines3 which uses PyTorch. As a result, TensorFlow models require you to:

```bash
python3 -m pip install tensorflow==2.10.0
```

And stable-baselines3 requires you to:

```bash
python3 -m pip install stable-baselines3==1.8.0 tensorboard
```

## Making the Environment

There two options to make an instance of gym-environemnt of the game. First, as mentioned above, you can use ```utils.make_env``` to create a new instance of the enironment. This option gives you access to changing various game class arguments, plus a couple of observation wrappers to appease environment usages for RL algorithms. Secondly, just use ```gym.make``` api as below considering that kwargs give you access to game class arguments:

```python
import gym

import environment


env = gym.make("EchineF/PitsAndOrbs-v0", **kwargs)
# or
env = gym.make("EchineF/PitsAndOrbs-two-players-v0", **kwargs)
```
In the ```wrappers``` directory, there various useful observation wrappers to make the returned observations more valueable for RL algorithms. You can use them manually or just set the appropriate argument for the ```utils.make_env``` function. For instance, ```wrappers.onehot_observation.OnehotObservation``` onehots each of the arrays in the ordereddict output; this wrapper makes it easier for a neural network to understand observations. 

## CLI Usage
The CLI is used for running or training RL models on the environment. Be aware that ```-r``` or ```--run``` means to run the model on the environment according to the ./configs/run.yaml, and save the frames in a .gif file, and ```-d``` means to whether sample actions deterministicly from agent or greedily. Also, ```-t``` or ```--train``` means to train a new model according to the ./configs/train.yaml settings.

```bash
python3 . [-r or -t] [-d] --mpath="path to the model"  --gpath="path to save the gif file"
```

For headless servers write this before the CLI above in the same line (make sure you have installed xfvb thoroughly):
```bash
xvfb-run -s "-screen 0 1400x900x24"
```
For more information use CLI's help command:
```bash
python3 . -h
```

### .gif file example
If you had installed the project properly, and used the CLI the right way, you should have a similar .gif file as below:

![](https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs/blob/main/gifs/First%20phase%20+%20agent%20has%20a%20memory%20+%20rew%20func%201%20(single%20agent%20with%20470mil-iters-A2C%20model).gif?raw=true "First phase + agent has a memory + rew func 1 (single agent with 470mil-iters-A2C model).gif")

## Sample Notebook
There is a sample notebook in the root directory of the repository: ```./notebook.ipynb```. Further use cases are implemented there. You can check it out.

Commit message:

Built an api for running or training an agent via CLI or agen.agent.Agent class which support both A2C and DQN models.

readme.md, after:

# Pits and Orbs Environment as a Multi-Agent System
## Description
A simple game written from scratch in Python having two modes: Terminal Printing and PyGame Window Rendering. To switch between these modes simply change this argument as follows: ```pygame_mode=True``` to have a nice PyGame window enabling you to play the game manually; this argument can be changed from ```game.pits_and_orbs.PitsAndOrbs``` constructor ```pygame_mode``` argument. Or, ```render_mode="human"``` argument from ```environment.pits_and_orbs_env.PitsAndOrbsEnv``` and ```utils.make_env``` function.

The ```game``` directory contains files and codes only for game object and is not suitable for RL projects. On the contrary, ```environment``` directory contains gym environment version of the game which has certain properties to used for Reinforcement Learning algorithms. You can install the game with the installer located in the ```dist``` directory.

The goal of the game is for the player to move the orbs to the pits in order to fill them all; that's just it. The game's properties can be set to values other than their default to have a distinct game. For example, the size of the game (its grid shape), the number of orbs (```orbs_num```), the number of pits (```pits_num```), and, even, the number of players (```player_num```) can be changed by the game's constructors. The ```player_num>1``` means the game will be a multi-agent system that the agents will try to cooperate whit eachother to fill the pits. The only thing that makes the environment a bit hard to solve is the limited number of movements that each player can take; the default value of ```max_movements``` is 30. In this environment movements is counted only through actual position changes for a player, but not the direction changes, picking orb up, or putting orb down since these are called steps in RL.

The challenging part of training an agent is that this environment is partially observable which means that the agent only has access to its eight neighbors, but not the whole state board (a 2D array). A memory is implemented to appease this matter. The memory tries to update each new cells that the agent sees (it sees them because they're its neighbors). That being said, the argument ```return_obs_type``` (for the game's constructor, environment's constructor, or utils.make_env function) can take three inputs to change the output (the observation): ```"partial obs"```, ```"full state"```, or ```"neighbors"```. The first one makes the game or environment return the memory of the agent(s) from ```reset``` or ```step``` functions. The second one makes them to return the entire table (array) of the game. The third one makes them to return only the 8 neighbors of the player.

The environment only allows players (or agents) to take 4 types of actions: ```Turn Right - Move Forward - Pick Orb Up - Put Orb Down```. It is obvious that ```Move Forward``` action means the player moves to the next cell in the direction that it is in without crossing the boundaries. 
Different values for the actions are:
| Action | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| Turn Right | 0 |
| Move Forward | 1 |
| Pick Orb Up | 2 |
| Put Orb Down | 3 |

Different values for player direction are:
| Direction | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| West | 0 |
| North | 1 |
| East | 2 |
| South | 3 |

Finally, different values for cell type are (valid values that are stored in a numpy array of a certain size that indicate existence of different situations in that position):
| Cell Type | Value |
| :--- | :---: |
| Nothing | 0 |
| Player | 1 |
| Orb | 2 |
| Pit | 3 |
| Player & Orb | 4 |
| Player & Pit | 5 |
| Orb & Pit | 6 |
| Player & Orb & Pit | 7 |

The environment outputs an observation object as an OrderedDict from ```step``` function and ```reset``` function; its structure is as follows:

```python
{
    "board": observation, # observation is an np array (depends on the return_obs_type argument)
    "player0_direction": player_directions[i], # i is the current player's index
    "player0_has_orb": players_have_orb[i] # i is the current player's index
}
```

0 after last two keys mean that those are first player's information, and if there were other player, we would have more keys.

To build the game simply use the following:

```bash
python3 game/setup.py build
```

or create an installer while building the game:
```bash
python3 game/setup.py bdist_msi
```

If the ```pygame_with_help``` argument is set to ```True```, the PyGame window will have extra height to show players' movements and a guide to what every possible coloring and shapes mean. For illustration purposes, ```pygame_with_help=True``` is set and shown below:

![](https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs/blob/main/materials/screenshot.jpg?raw=true "A sample screenshot of the starting point of the PyGame Window mode with help showed.")

## Reward Function
Two distinct reward functions are implemented, one of which is sparse and the other isn't. By the arguments ```reward_function_type``` and ```reward_function```, the using reward function of the game can be changed. ```reward_function``` can get any function that has an argument of flag switching on all the situations a player can get into. The situations and their values for the two implemented reward functions are as follows:

| Situation Flag | Reward Function Type 0 Values | Reward Function Type 1 Values |
| :--- | :---: | :---: |
| turned right | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to move forward and moved forward | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward but stayed | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to move forward to cell type 1 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to move forward to cell type 2 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to pick orb up with already having another orb | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to pick orb up in cell type 4 | 0. | 0. |
| tried to pick orb up in cell types other than 4 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down without having an orb | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 1 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 4 | 0. | -0.1 |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 5 | 1. | 1. |
| tried to put orb down on cell type 7 | 0. | -0.1 |

## Loading the Project
To load the project use the following logic:

```bash
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs.git
cd "Pits-and-Orbs"
```

If you are going to use the project in a headless server like Google Colab, try installing a virtual display as the following (this is only the case if you are trying to run an agent in the environment and create a .gif file from the frames of the PyGame window since PyGame needs a display to render its frames):

```bash
apt-get install swig cmake ffmpeg
apt install python-opengl
apt install ffmpeg
apt install xvfb
pip3 install pyvirtualdisplay
```

Then, use the following piece of code in Python (like Colab) to create a virtual display before any of the project's codes:

```python
from pyvirtualdisplay import Display


virtual_display = Display(visible=0, size=(1400, 900))
virtual_display.start()
```

## Installation
To use the game and its environment you can install the below necessary dependencies in a new virtual environment (all the materials are tested in Python=3.10.10), but these do not include the usages for RL agents. First create and activate a new environment or just skip this part (if you are using a headless server like Colab make sure to go through with the last section's guide in your dev environment).

```bash
python3 venv -env pae_env
source pae_env/bin/activate
```
Then, install project's dependencies for rendering it on a PyGame window.

```bash
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

To use RL models you should either install TensorFlow or Stable Baselines3 which uses PyTorch. As a result, TensorFlow models require you to:

```bash
python3 -m pip install tensorflow==2.10.0
```

And stable-baselines3 requires you to:

```bash
python3 -m pip install stable-baselines3==1.8.0 tensorboard
```

## Making the Environment

There two options to make an instance of gym-environemnt of the game. First, as mentioned above, you can use ```utils.make_env``` to create a new instance of the enironment. This option gives you access to changing various game class arguments, plus a couple of observation wrappers to appease environment usages for RL algorithms. Secondly, just use ```gym.make``` api as below considering that kwargs give you access to game class arguments:

```python
import gym

import environment


env = gym.make("EchineF/PitsAndOrbs-v0", **kwargs)
# or
env = gym.make("EchineF/PitsAndOrbs-two-players-v0", **kwargs)
```
In the ```wrappers``` directory, there various useful observation wrappers to make the returned observations more valueable for RL algorithms. You can use them manually or just set the appropriate argument for the ```utils.make_env``` function. For instance, ```wrappers.onehot_observation.OnehotObservation``` onehots each of the arrays in the ordereddict output; this wrapper makes it easier for a neural network to understand observations. 

## CLI Usage
The CLI is used for running or training RL models on the environment. Be aware that ```-r``` or ```--run``` means to run the model on the environment according to the ./configs/run.yaml, and save the frames in a .gif file, and ```-d``` means to whether sample actions deterministicly from agent or greedily. Also, ```-t``` or ```--train``` means to train a new model according to the ./configs/train.yaml settings.

```bash
python3 . [--run or --train]="config file path"
```

For headless servers write this before the CLI above in the same line (make sure you have installed xfvb thoroughly):
```bash
xvfb-run -s "-screen 0 1400x900x24"
```
For more information use CLI's help command:
```bash
python3 . -h
```

### .gif file example
If you had installed the project properly, and used the CLI the right way, you should have a similar .gif file as below:

![](https://github.com/hosein-fanai/Pits-and-Orbs/blob/main/gifs/First%20phase%20+%20agent%20has%20a%20memory%20+%20rew%20func%201%20(single%20agent%20with%20470mil-iters-A2C%20model).gif?raw=true "First phase + agent has a memory + rew func 1 (single agent with 470mil-iters-A2C model).gif")

## Available Deep RL Models
For the first phase of the project (single agent playing in the 5x5 grid with 30 movement limit and a memory of its past confrontations with its 8 neighbors), there are three different models in ```./models/``` directory and their correspondig config files are in ```./configs/```.

## Sample Notebook
There is a sample notebook in the root directory of the repository: ```./notebook.ipynb```. Further use cases are implemented there. You can check it out.
